This hyperdrive, or microdrive array, is based on the designs of Bruce McNaughton’s 1997 patent (US 5928143 A) and hyperdrives used by the lab of Professor Howard Eichenbaum at Boston University. However, rather than relying on expensive machined moulds, the moulds were recreated in CAD and 3D printed. Furthermore, a custom PCB was designed for the EIB and costs ~1/10th the price of commercially available EIBs. All files, including 3D print files, PCB file, materials list, and step-by-step pictorial build instructions are available for free online: https://github.com/blakeporterneuro/openSourceHyperdrive

The microdrive array consisted of 16 independently manipulatable microdrives in a circular array around a custom made printed circuit board (PCB) as an electrode interface board (EIB). Each of the 16 microdrives consisted of three main components arranged linearly: an inner 23gauage (g) stainless steel electrode guide cannula, a 12mm 0-80 stainless steel hex head screw, and an outer 19g stainless steel support cannula. 

To create the microdrive array, a 3D CAD model of a negative mould of the base of the microdrive array was created and 3D printed (Ultimaker 2; Ultimaker Ltd.) with ABS plastic. This mould would be used to cast the microdrive array’s base. The mould was 35mm in diameter and had 16 equally spaced microdrive holes. In order to cast the mould, 20mm long, stainless steel flat head screws were screwed into the centre holes around the array. Twenty millimetre sections of 23g and 19g cannula were cut and pressure fit into the inner and outer holes, respectively. A 5mm thick circular collar was screwed to the bottom of the mould base. The collar’s inner wall was angled at 60 degrees outwards. This surface would later be used to attach a plastic cone to protect the microdrive while it was on the rat’s head. This circular collar also had 3 evenly spaced holes for 0-80 screws to be screwed through. Three 0-80 screws were screwed in so they protruded 5mm past the inner wall of the collar. Lastly, a stainless steel M5 x 30mm screw was screwed into the centre of the mould base such that the threading went past the collar, resulting in an M5 thread hole through the centre of the base. This will later be used to attach the PCB.  

Once the mould was prepared it was placed level on a work bench. Universal Mold Release® (Smooth On Inc.) was sprayed so that it a thin layer covered the inner surface of the mould and all components. Smooth-Cast 300® (Smooth On Inc.) was prepared and slowly poured into the mould. Once the Smooth-Cast300® set, all the screws and cannula were removed from the mould and cast. The three screws holding the collar were removed and the collar and mould were separated. The microdrive array was cleaned of Universal Mold Release® and excess Smooth-Cast 300® was removed with sand paper. Sixteen, 45mm long sections of 27g cannula were cut and placed into the inner holes of the microdrive array such that 2mm extended above the top of the base of the mould while 30mm came out the bottom. All 16 27g cannula were fit into a 7mm long section of aluminium tube (inner diameter: 2.4mm, outer diameter: 3.15mm). The base of the aluminium tub was set so that it was 20mm from the microdrive array base. Once all 27g cannula were in, any remaining space in the aluminium tube was filled with various gauges of cannula and 0.2mm stainless steel wire until no space was left, resulting in enough friction so that none of the 27g guide cannula could move. The base of the aluminium tube and all the excess length of cannula was cut with a rotary tool (Dremel Inc.). The bevel of a 27g needle was used to clear any internal sharp edges of the 27g cannula caused by the rotary tool. The 27g cannula was then reamed out with 0.2mm tick wire to clear any debris. The microdrive array was laid level with the 27g cannula guide tubes facing upwards. Dental acrylic was applied in and around the 27g cannula coming from the microdrive array to the aluminium holding tube to secure everything in place.     

To construct the microdrives, the joining arms was cast with Smooth-Cast 300® using a custom designed 3D printed mould consisting of 6 rows of 5 arm mould wells. As with the microdrive array, the 23g cannula, 0-80 stainless steel screw, and 19g cannula were arranged in each arm mould. Universal Mold Release® was sprayed one, Smooth-Cast 300® was prepared, and a 1ml syringe with a 23g needle was used to fill each well. Once the Smooth-Cast 300® was set, the hardware was taken out and the arms were cleaned and sanded. For each microdrive, a 0-80, 12mm long stainless steel hex head screw was put into the centre hole of an arm. The screw was turned until the arm reached the head of the screw. At this point the arm was held with pliers and the screw was turned approximately 5 full revolutions, stripping the threads inside the arm. A small 0-80 nut was put on the screw and advanced so that it was loosely up against the arm. Epoxy resin was placed on the underside of the nut and on the screw’s threads immediately under the nut, fixing the nut to the screw. Each microdrive was checked to be sure the nut was not too tight and the screw could still freely turn. Twelve millimetre long 23g cannula was cut and placed halfway into the inner hole of the arm. Epoxy resin was placed around the cannula and it was advanced further into the hole such that 2mm extended above the arm, approximately level with the screw’s head, while 8mm extended below the arm, level with the end of the screw. After the epoxy resin cured, each microdrive’s 23g cannula was tested for security by applying upward pressure to the base of the cannula. 

Sixteen, 23mm long 19g cannula were cut and placed into their outer holes on the microdrive base with super glue placed in each hole beforehand. For each of the sixteen places on the microdrive array, a microdrive was fitted by placing the 19g cannula on the base through the outer hole of the arm and the microdrive was lowered to the base. The inner 23g cannula on the microdrive was fit over the 2mm section of 27g guide cannula. The screw was turned approximately 3 full revolutions until it was secure in the microdrive array. 50mm long silica glass tubing (0.099mm inner diameter, 0.17mm outer diameter) was fed through each of the microdrive’s 23g guide cannula into and through the 27g guide cannula. A drop of super glue was used to fix the silica into the 23g cannula with the silica tube extending approximately 1mm above the 23g cannula. Once the super glue was dry, all microdrive were turned all the way down so that the nut reached the microdrive array base. At this level, all the excess silica coming out the base of the base of the microdrive array was cut with a rotary tool to extend 1mm past the aluminium tube. This ensured that if a microdrive was advanced as far as possible, damage to the brain due to the silica would be minimal. Silica was them reamed with 0.1mm thick wire to clear debris. 

In the centre of the microdrive array, an M5 x 25mm nylon rod was screwed in with super glue on the threads such that 15mm of rod extended out of the microdrive base. Screwed onto the nylon rod and secured with epoxy resin was a custom designed and 3D printed PCB holder. The PCB was then secured to the holder with two screws and epoxy resin. Two, 17 pin dual row Mill-Max male connectors (Mill-Max Mfg. Corp) were soldered to the PCB and secured with epoxy resin. A tetrode, a bundle of four electrodes (described in detail below), was carefully fed into and entirely though the silica tube of every microdrive and secured inside the silica with a drop of super glue. Each electrode of each tetrode was carefully fed into the appropriate through-holes on the PCB. Electrodes were secured to the PCB with a conical gold pin (Neuralynx, Inc.) pressed into the through-hole. As the gold pins are pressed into the PCB, they strip the insulation off the electrodes and create an electrical connection between the electrode and PCB. Once every microdrive was loaded with a tetrode, excess tetrode length was cut with scissors at the base of the microdrive array so that 1mm of tetrode protrudes out of the base when the microdrive screw was turned fully up. An LFP and ground wire are soldered to the PCB. A small notch was made with a rotary tool on the edge of the microdrive base and the LFP and ground wire are placed through this notch so they reach the bottom of the microdrive. A protective plastic cone was made from a 5cm long piece cut from the neck of a 2litre Schweppes soda bottle. This cone was secured to the angled lip of the microdrive base created by the aforementioned collar with 3, 4mm screws. A small amount of dental acrylic was also used around the bottom lip of the cone for more security and to fill in any small gaps between the cone and microdrive array base. Lastly, protective cover for the cone was made with a 7cm diameter circle was cut from ridged a rigid plastic food container lid. This protective cover was secured to the cone with 3 pieces of masking tape and wrapped with crepe bandaged (Universal Specialities, Ltd.) to cover any gaps between the cone and cover so that no debris could get in while the rat was in his home cage.
